In Java, inheritance is a mechanism by which one class can inherit properties and methods from another class.
The class that inherits from another class is called a subclass, while the class being inherited from is called a superclass or parent class.
When a subclass inherits from a superclass, it gains access to all of the superclass's public and protected methods and fields, and can also override or extend these methods and fields.
To create a subclass in Java, you use the "extends" keyword followed by the name of the superclass.
The following code creates a subclass called "Student" that inherits from a superclass called "Person"

class Person {
    String name;
    int age;
void sayHello() {
System.out.println("Hello, my name is " + name);
}
}
class Student extends Person {
int grade;
void sayHello() {
System.out.println("Hi, I'm " + name + " and I'm in grade " + grade);
}
}


Inheritance in Java is a mechanism in which one object acquires all the properties and behaviors of a parent object. It is an important part of OOPs (Object Oriented programming systems).

The idea behind inheritance in Java is that we can create new classes that are built upon existing classes.

When we inherit from an existing class, we can reuse methods and fields of the parent class. Moreover, you can add new methods and fields in your current class also. Inheritance represents the IS-A relationship which is also known as a parent-child relationship.

class Subclass-name extends Superclass-name
{
//methods and fields
}

On the basis of class, there can be three types of inheritance in java: single, multilevel and hierarchical. In java programming, multiple and hybrid inheritance is supported through interface only.

•Single - When a class inherits another class, it is known as a single inheritance.
•Multilevel - When there is a chain of inheritance, it is known as multilevel inheritance.
•Hierarchical - When two or more classes inherits a single class, it is known as hierarchical inheritance.

•Multiple – It is implemented with the help of interfaces as we can’t inherit two classed as parent classes.
•Hybrid – It is the combination of the above mentioned types of Inheritance.
