In Java, the string is basically an object that represents a sequence of char values. An array of characters works the same as a Java string. Java String class provides a lot of methods to perform operations on strings such as compare(), concat(), equals(), split(), length(), replace(), compareTo(), intern(), substring(), etc. 

The java. lang. String class implements Serializable, Comparable, and CharSequence interfaces. There are two ways to create a String object - By string literal, By new keyword.

Java String literal is created by using double quotes. Each time you create a string literal, the JVM checks the "string constant pool" first. If the string already exists in the pool, a reference to the pooled instance is returned. If the string doesn't exist in the pool, a new string instance is created and placed in the pool. If we use a new keyword, JVM will create a new string object in normal (non-pool) heap memory, and the literal will be placed in the string constant pool. The variable s will refer to the object in a heap (non-pool).

In Java, String concatenation forms a new String that is the combination of multiple strings. The ways to concatenate strings in Java:

•By + (String concatenation) operator - Java String concatenation operator (+) is used to add strings.

•By concat() method - The String concat() method concatenates the specified string to the end of current string.

•String concatenation using StringBuilder class - StringBuilder is class provides append() method to perform concatenation operation.

•String concatenation using format() method - String.format() method allows to concatenate multiple strings using format specifier like %s followed by the string values or objects.

•String concatenation using String.join() method (Java Version 8+) - The String.join() method is available in Java version 8 and all the above versions. String.join() method accepts arguments first a separator and an array of String objects.

•String concatenation using StringJoiner class (Java Version 8+) - StringJoiner class has all the functionalities of String.join() method. In advance its constructor can also accept optional arguments, prefix and suffix.

•String concatenation using Collectors.joining() method (Java Version 8+) - The Collectors class in Java 8 offers joining() method that concatenates the input elements in a similar order as they occur.

In Java, a string is a sequence of characters that is used to represent text. A string in Java is an object, which means that it has certain properties and behaviors that can be accessed and manipulated by the programmer.

String objects are created using the String class, which is a built-in class in the Java standard library. To create a new string object, you can use a string literal enclosed in double quotes, like this:

String myString = "Hello, world!";

You can also create a string object using the String constructor, like this:

String myString = new String("Hello, world!");

Once you have created a string object, you can access its properties and behaviors using various methods provided by the String class. For example, you can get the length of a string using thelength() method, like this:  

int length = myString.length();

You can also compare strings using theequals() method, like this:  

if (myString.equals("Hello, world!")) {
// do something
}

Strings in Java are immutable, which means that once you create a string object, you cannot change its contents. However, you can create a new string object that contains the modified contents of the original string. For example, you can concatenate two strings using the+ operator, like this:  

String greeting = "Hello, ";
String name = "Alice";
String message = greeting + name;

In this example, themessage string object will contain the value "Hello, Alice".
